Texto: Many in organization studies and business ethics will be familiar with the rise and fall of Theranos:a biotech
company started by Elizabeth Holmes that hit a 9-billion-dollar valuation just before leadership was indicted on charges
of fraud. The story is one that obviously demonstrates several important lessons regarding deception in Silicon Valley,
transparency in leadership, and the corrupting power of greed. We believe there is also a story of CH-MI here9. Though
there are dozens of individual cases we could explore, the most glaring is that of Ian Gibbons, the late biochemist and
chief scientist at Theranos. We argue that Gibbons was a good chemist. In striving to maintain the standards of his
practice within a vicious institution, he met his untimely death. As we trace the Theranos story, it is worth noting
that we will be primarily using the reporting and narrative of Carreyrou at The Wall Street Journal. Carreyrou published
dozens of articles on Theranos between 2014 and 2019, including the original expose that ousted the company. He is also
the author of Bad Blood: Secrets and Lies in a Silicon Valley Startup Carreyrou, which presents the entire Theranos
story from inception to collapse. The idea for Theranos began with CEO and founder, Elizabeth Holmes in 2003. She
dropped out of Stanford to pursue the dream of revolutionizing healthcare by using small fingerpricks of blood to run
hundreds of diagnostic tests on a portable machine. By 2010, Holmes was able to secure nearly 100 million dollars in
venture capital and built an impressive board of directors. She was able to do so because she presented an inspiring
mission. Her product would, she claimed, make preventive care affordable and accessible to the masses. Holmes championed
Theranos in this way:as an agent for health equity. As she explained in an interview with Bill Clinton, Our work is in
the belief that the access to healthcare information is a basic human right. [...] Health data needs to be accessible to
people before they get sick. [...] Our work is in being able to make lab testing accessible in time for therapy to be
effected and to do that in a way where every person irrespective of their insurance status, irrespective of where they
live, can afford the ability to get a test done (Holmes,). Theranos supposedly existed for this purpose:to expand access
to needed health care. Though this purpose was communicated in interviews and pitches, Theranos was never actually a
company that principally sought to expand access to health. In truth, Holmes had a very different mission:to be a
billionaire (Carreyrou,, p. 11). This is where the vicious formation of the institution began:at the beginning and with
the wrong end. She sought exponential growth over and above actually developing an innovative product in biotechnology
that would contribute to human flourishing and the common good. This end:becoming a billionaire:colored the way Holmes
led and managed everything at Theranos. This is, after all, the usefulness of final ends (Frankfurt,). They inform,
guide, and direct our actions, and they do so regardless of whether the appropriate final ends are pursued. Holmes made
extraordinary claims about the capabilities and possibilities of the technology that could not be supported by her
chemists or engineers. She carefully created silos to ensure that employees did not understand the full scope of the
project's development. She held outrageous expectations for her workers, sometimes demanding departments to run 24/7.
She treated employees as disposable linchpins, quickly discarding those who did not fall in line. Even worse, she would
punish those who challenged the morality of her actions by firing them, demoting them, or ceasing to give them pertinent
information. "She was so laser-focused on achieving her goals that she seemed oblivious to the practical implications of
her decisions" (Carreyrou,, p. 26). Indeed, Holmes would pursue whatever means necessary to make her billionaire vision
a reality. Vice was not merely excused. It was expected. Moreover, Holmes's myopic billionaire vision effectively
marginalized the two "core" practices vital to the success of her project:biochemistry and engineering. She hired
excellent scientists who were trained at Cambridge and Ivy League institutions. However, Holmes did not want them to be
excellent scientists. She wanted technocrats to create her product for the sake of maximizing profitability. Holmes
insisted that "the Edison":the machine that Theranos was working on to conduct the blood tests:had to be portable and
had to use only a small droplet of blood. She was uncompromising in these demands because she already promised them to
investors. She did this without really understanding whether they were scientifically possible. When the evidence
repeatedly showed that more than a droplet of blood was needed to conduct the tests, she barreled forward with more
vigor. It was as if she hoped to yield a successful test by sheer force of will. When her teams did not produce the
desired answers, she shrouded their results in secrecy. She kept moving things forward:scheduling clinical trials and
seeking partnerships with drug stores:though the technology was not ready or working accurately. Holmes settled for the
guise of success in the lab, not excellent science. It was within this highly vicious structure at Theranos that Ian
Gibbons worked as the Director of Chemistry. Carreyrou develops an exceptional character sketch of Gibbons during his
time at Theranos, explaining that Gibbons was known for his dedication to and love of his craft (p. 281). "He was
passionate about the science of blood testing and loved to teach it. In the company's early years, he would sometimes
hold little lectures to educate the rest of the staff about the fundamentals of biochemistry" (Carreyrou,, p. 281). Most
importantly, Gibbons had high standards of excellence. He was uncompromising in not making concessions or cutting
corners that would somehow endanger the veracity of test results and subordinate concern for patients to the product
itself. He was tireless in his conviction that things "must be done right" (Carreyrou,, p. 202). Gibbons was, in fact, a
chemist who pursued excellence in his practice, and he was beloved by his coworkers and his dear wife. As a result, many
things at Theranos troubled him. He was open about his frustrations with Holmes's management, particularly the
intentional silos she created, the secrecy, and the exaggerations about the technology's readiness. He expressed
frustration to a co-worker when Theranos moved forward with pursuing a partnership with Walgreens, implementing Theranos
clinics at their neighborhood pharmacies. The technology was not ready; it did not work. Gibbons's willingness to
vocalize the truth about the science threatened the secrecy Holmes worked hard to maintain. She did not want his expert
opinion, even though his job was to do precisely that:to provide his expert opinion. When Holmes caught wind that
Gibbons was discussing these realities with coworkers, she attempted to fire him. However, his expertise proved
invaluable, and he was offered another role at the company without the same access to information and authority in his
craft. He took the demotion, hoping he could continue doing what he loved in some worthwhile capacity. When Gibbons was
re-hired and demoted at Theranos, he was effectively silenced and removed from the lab. He started working from home as
a mere technical consultant, remaining steadfast in his commitment to excellence. The new Director of Chemistry was much
more willing to compromise in places where Gibbons would not relent. However, Gibbons was still committed to the task,
arguing for hours over the phone about the importance of accurate testing and how anything less than excellent results
would negatively impact patient wellbeing. His unwavering pursuit of standards rendered him a defunct chemist at a
company he knew to be deceitful. The circumstances were horrible, so why didn't he just leave? At this point, Gibbons
was 67 years old, he had recently been diagnosed with cancer, and he was battling undiagnosed depression. As Carreyrou
explains, he felt it was unlikely that he would be able to secure another job as a chemist if he left Theranos (p. 204).
Things just kept getting worse from here for Gibbons. He was called to a deposition in a case regarding several Theranos
patents, and this forced him into a corner. He had two choices: lie and perjure himself about the nature and origin of
the patents, or break an NDA with Theranos and face Holmes's wrath. It was a heavy moral and existential predicament,
and Gibbons saw no way out. Theranos attorneys kept pressuring him to lie, to push back the deposition, to use his
cancer as an excuse to evade court, and so on. But this did not mesh with Gibbons's character. He was not a liar, but if
he were to go on, he also needed a job and health insurance. This acute MI at the end of his long chronic struggle at
Theranos weighed on Gibbons heavily. Linking this instance to Figure 1, it is worth emphasizing here that this is a case
of experiencing CH-MI and A-MI in tandem. In the midst of this painful dilemma, Gibbons tragically took his own life.
Theranos leadership barely spoke of it after he had been with the company for 10 years and produced most of the patents
that they had secured. Rather than conveying her remorse to his wife, Holmes told her that Gibbons's laptop and
corporate documents belonged to Theranos and that she needed to return them to the company promptly. In looking at the
story of Ian Gibbons and his time at Theranos, it is easy to see the marginalization of practices on display. Holmes
vigorously pursued a billion-dollar valuation at the expense of scientific integrity. She hired particularly excellent
scientists and demanded that they sacrifice their commitment to excellence for the sake of Theranos and its feigned
success. Chemists and engineers at Theranos were expected to betray the standards of the scientific community. In fact,
they were expected to not care about them at all. One could argue that Gibbons was so deeply habituated as an excellent
chemist that he could not simply betray those standards for Theranos. His virtuous desires could not be deformed by the
Weberian manager. Instead, during his last few years at Theranos, Gibbons was forced into a position of silent protest,
enduring the stress of significant cognitive dissonance. There is a particular sort of pain when someone like Gibbons:a
practitioner committed to excellence in his practice:is pressured to comply with vice as a worker in a poorly formed
institution. We describe this pain as CH-MI. It is easy look at this case study and draw the conclusion that such
circumstances are rare:to hold up the example of Elizabeth Holmes as a fanatical egomaniac. Likewise, it is easy to hold
up the example of Theranos as an exceptionally disingenuous start-up. Following MacIntyre's critique, perhaps this isn't
so. Perhaps there are more lawyers being thwarted the opportunity to work for justice, doctors being thwarted the
opportunity to work for health, and chemists being thwarted the opportunity to uphold the standards of scientific method
than we are comfortable knowing. Holmes's persona and the structure she implemented at Theranos were, after all, openly
borrowed from Steve Jobs. She captivated Silicon Valley because she was familiar:tenacious, cold, and obsessed with
success. The secrecy and results-driven demands that characterized the Theranos culture were easily dismissed and
excused because of how closely they mirrored the norm. Thus, we conclude that the setting ripe for CH-MI is common and
pervasive.